**Introduction**

Read the following vignette about an EFL teacher’s experience teaching middle school students.

*Vignette*: My Middle Schoolers in Cambodia

At one point in my early years as an EFL teacher, I was teaching middle school students in rural Cambodia. It was memorable in part because I was so hot and there was no AC, but also because my teaching style was so new to the students. When I walked into their homeroom class on the first day of classes, everyone fell silent. Apparently, no one had told them I was coming! Then a student whispered something in Khmer, and everyone quickly got out their English textbooks. They sat in rapt attention!

I shook my head and told them to get out of their desks and make a circle. I then threw a rubber ball to one student and started modelling a simple warm-up activity where all students must ask and share their names, likes, and dislikes while throwing the ball to each other. They kept looking at one another with stunned expressions that said, “Is this really happening?”

The students had long been trained to “follow the textbook and parrot the teacher,” so much so that they were initially reluctant to partake in my energetic, student-driven activities. It took me some time to create a classroom environment that encouraged and included spontaneous speech and original writing, but it ended up being well worth it. Once those students got the hang of it, there was no stopping what they could communicate!

The vignette above demonstrates one teacher’s effort to create an interactive classroom where communication is made meaningful and related to the students. Creating interaction among students is a core foundation for having a student-centered classroom. In this chapter, we address the meaning of *student-centered* and provide strategies to implement this approach in your EFL classes.

To begin, think of a student-centered classroom as a place where students are encouraged to actively participate in the learning process and to take responsibility for their own learning. It is a classroom in which students are intrinsically motivated and want to study, not because they are told to do so, but because they understand the purpose of each activity and the benefits of it. Students are actively involved in a lesson and they experience the material as they work together with their peers in pairs or in groups in a cooperative and collaborative setting. The teacher designs lessons to include experiential learning and varied activities. Students actively experience the knowledge the teacher is imparting, for example by manipulating realia, organizing a scavenger hunt, or using role plays and case studies.