**Teacher's Roles in a Student-Centered Classroom**

A teacher can provide all the necessary information; however, for learning to occur, students must be willing to participate. Let us look again at the
proverb: "You can lead a horse to water, but you can't make it drink." The same happens in an EFL classroom. If students are passive, they will not
benefit from the learning situation, regardless of how well the teacher is prepared (Scharle & Szabo, 2000). Thus, the teacher’s role is mainly that
of a facilitator. In other words, the teacher needs to motivate students, involve them in activities, and create enthusiasm for studying both inside
and outside the classroom.

The teacher can also be a mentor, a referee, an observer, and an evaluator, but unlike in the traditional teacher-centered classroom, the teacher
is not a lecturer. The students need to be the focus. Teacher talking time must be minimal so that learners have ample opportunities to practice
their speaking skills, express their opinions, and make comments about their learning.

Leo Jones (2007) summarizes the teacher’s role as follows:

- Students can’t be “taught” – they can only be helped to learn. In a student-centered classroom, our role is to help and encourage students to develop their skills, but without relinquishing our
more traditional role as a source of information, advice, and knowledge. In a student-centered classroom, the teacher and students are a team working together. Together our role is to make
sure everyone benefits from the lesson, supporting one another. (p. 25)

This approach should occur at all levels, even beginner levels. Although beginning level students are more dependent on the teacher than is the case in higher levels, student-centered learning still
needs to be the aim. Even very low-level students should be encouraged to move beyond repeating words uttered by the teacher and to strive to make phrases that practice language for meaningful
purposes (Brown & Lee, 2015). As students increase in proficiency, the teacher should strive to increase the student-centered dynamic. Below are other key tips to help get you thinking about a student-
centered class:

Importance of teacher preparation. In a student-centered class, the teacher is responsible for a good deal of preparation; students need structured activities for pair and group work (e.g., role play
cards, case scenarios, etc.). Once you are in class, your role will be simpler; you will mostly set up activities, monitor your students, and give them feedback. If you prepare well, teaching in a student-
centered classroom is actually easier than in a traditional teacher-centered class, especially if you deal with students who have a hard time paying attention to lectures. By giving them group activities,
you are giving them a chance to work with their peers, and by providing them with worksheets, you are presenting them with new language and reviewing the covered material. The importance of
teacher preparation is therefore crucial to the success of this approach.

Do not lose control over the class. Give your students specific tasks to complete. Every small-group activity should involve a problem to solve or a project to design. After completing a task, each group
or pair should present their outcome to another group, pair, or to the whole class. When appropriate, they may also be asked to prepare some kind of written report. While presenting to their peers,
students practice their speaking skills, and while writing their answers, they work on their composition skills.

Group work may get noisy. Noise is not necessarily a bad thing. When students are excited, they will talk. As long as they are on task and are using English, do not worry. Noise can be a sign of students’
involvement, not a lack of discipline. Have a certain sign that you will use once you want to stop the activity – you can use chimes, clap your hands, or flicker the lights.

Importance of teacher reflection. Reflect on your own teaching and ask your students for feedback. Incorporate their ideas. Reflect on the activities that were not successful and think about why they
did not work in the context of this particular classroom. Sometimes the same activity may work great with one group of students but will not work at all with a different group. Each class is unique; adapt
your activities to the students in your class.