**Pair and Group Work**

By working in pairs or in groups, students can exchange ideas freely without being put on the spot, unlike a student giving an answer in front of the whole class. Moreover, pair and group work increase student talking time. This is extremely important, especially when teaching large heterogeneous classes. Remember that your class may be the students only opportunity to speak English.

Do not be overly concerned with student errors in pair or group work. It is a common myth that students will reinforce their classmates’s errors if left uncorrected by the teacher (Spada, 2011). We now know that student language accuracy in unmonitored group work is equal to times when the teacher monitors whole class work. In fact, if done in excess, teacher corrections actually have a negative effect on student performance.

To make the most of pair work and group work, make sure that students change partners frequently so that they can be exposed to other accents, various ways of talking, and different personalities. You may also want to change the seating arrangement if you feel that a different classroom setup will help students speak more comfortably. To optimize the benefits of group work, groups should be limited to 3-4 students when possible (more information on how to group students is included in the next section). According to Brown and Lee (2015), tasks that are short, simple, and controlled are best suited for pair work rather than group work. Their recommendations are summarized in Figure 2.

---

Figure 2. Pair work activities

| Activities Best Suited to Pair Work: |
|---|
| - Dialogue or drills |    
| - Simple question and answer exercises |    
| - Quick brainstorm activities |    
| - Peer review of written work |    
| - Preparation prior to merging with larger groups |    

Adapted from Brown and Lee (2015, p. 275)

Include pair work and group work activities in every lesson. You may want to give students different roles such as writer, reader, presenter, team leader, etc. Assigning specific roles ensures that each student participates. The roles may switch after different activities. You may also give the groups funny names to increase student involvement, such as the Mighty Lions, Pink Panthers, Red Wizards, etc.

Monitor and circulate around the room during group work. Offer help and advice to students, check their understanding, and make sure every student is participating equally. Be a consultant. Evaluate students on how well they completed the task and how well they cooperated. When group work is assessed, many instructors chose to give all students the same grade so cooperation is taken into account.