**Relationships**

Teacher/student: The two main pitfalls that many teachers fall into, whether new or experienced, are thinking that they are their students’ friend or thinking that they are their students’ parent. Neither is the case. Since we are in a position of power, our students are never our friends (Ferlazzo, 2011). However, this does not mean that we cannot be friendly with them; we simply want to avoid putting ourselves in difficult situations. If we know that our students eat at a certain place, there is no harm in eating at that place. Nor is there harm in sitting and eating with them. However, if alcohol is involved, consider keeping away from this situation. If you are a person who likes to frequent bars, taverns, and dance clubs, you do not want to frequent places where your students tend to also congregate.

Teacher and Students’ Families: Teachers have a lot of contact with students and may even have more contact with them than they do with their family members. The relationships with students’ families should be similar to the relationships with the students themselves. In many countries, the extended family is an important part of a person’s life. As such, avoid having personal relationships with these people. Of course, you can be friendly and mingle with them, but you should not try to build intimate personal relationships with students’ family members because it can result in unintended consequences within the classroom.

Other Teachers: Peer relationships with other teachers will likely be some of the most enriching experiences you have. At the majority of schools, you will get as a team. Many colleagues look out for each other. You may celebrate birthdays, marriages, and other important dates together. These people may be your pedagogical spotters. They may help you when you are in rough patches, and you may help them in turn. You will likely be able to bounce ideas off each other. If your school does not have an official mentoring program, you may find that one or several of your colleagues can become your de facto mentor(s). Remember that these relationships are professional. It is a lot easier to open up slowly than to close up once you tell someone your life story. Take your time to get to know the people you work with. Little by little, you will be able to open up to them, and you may soon call many of them friends.

Even though you have the opportunity to make some lifelong friendships in your teaching assignments abroad, take caution when entering into romantic relationships with coworkers. Many people do date other employees at schools, but these relationships may change the general dynamic of the workplace or be counter to institutional guidelines. You should be aware of any workplace rules against expanded relationships outside of the professional realm.

Administration: Getting to know the culture of your school’s administration is important. The relationship teachers have with administrators can often be very positive when these roles are supportive of staff. In some cases, the opposite can be true. You may be able to tell in the initial phases of an interview (prior to accepting your position) how much the administration will mentor you. Try to establish a professional relationship with them from the beginning so that you can learn from their experience, and don’t hesitate to take advantage of their experience in order to learn from them.