**Becoming an Effective Teacher**

Take a moment to reflect on why you decided to become a teacher. Maybe you are changing professions because your current career path has inspired you to take a new challenge. Another possibility is that you have always wanted to live in a foreign country, and teaching English as a foreign language (EFL) sounds like the way to fulfill that dream. When you discuss this decision with acquaintances, friends, or family, you probably get one of two responses. The first is that teaching is one of the most rewarding experiences ever, and you are going to do great things as a teacher. The other response might be cynicism or discouragement for a variety of reasons, ranging from pay and working conditions to poor attitudes toward teachers. While we all have different reasons why we decided to become teachers, it would serve us well to understand what a teacher actually does.

As teachers, we are able to take advantage of the classroom setting to encourage habits that lead to lifelong learning (Smith, 1982). In order to understand the role of the teacher, we should first look at what a teacher does inside the classroom, the relationships that overlap inside and outside the classroom, and teacher interactions in the real world.

As teachers of English as a foreign language (EFL), we are not just language experts, even though we are often hired as experts in other countries to supplement existing locally-trained language teachers. We are there to help our learners construct knowledge (Spiro, Feltovich, Jacobson, & Coulson, 1995). We must have the interpersonal skills to lead a group of people. We have to convince them that participating in class activities and assignments helps them. We need to persuade students on a daily basis to try something new. There is a saying, “You can lead a horse to water, but you can’t make it drink.” Our job as teachers is to lead our students to realize that when they reach the water (our classroom), they should “drink” what we offer (new knowledge and skills). Students also look up to us, often seeing us as their mentors. Teachers are thrust into this position of authority over a group of students, and this can be intimidating to some and corrupting to others, but not all. Our job is to toe the line and be a respectful mentor for our students to admire and emulate. As you will see in later chapters, there are also various cultural factors that impact the student-teacher relationship. It will be important for each teacher to strive to understand and adapt to cultural dynamics as classroom leaders.