**Identifying Qualities of an Effective Teacher**

If you were to ask a room of 30 people what it means to be an effective teacher, you would probably get 30 different responses. Many people would say that they can recognize good or bad teaching when they see it, but good teaching has so many components that it can be very difficult to define. Think back to the teachers who made a difference in your life. What made them so special? A lot of us would say that they believed in us. Others might say that they were passionate about what they were doing. Perhaps these favorite teachers had a unique way of delivering information that helped to inspire you. By contrast, if you were to think about the teachers that you disliked, what characteristics come to mind? A lot of people might say that these teachers didn’t seem to care or were disorganized. Maybe they did not want to be there or treated it like a job where they simply punched in and out every day.

It is often hard to discern process and product when we consider good teaching. In the educational context, product refers to the end results of teaching, i.e., the work that is created and the scores or grades given to students. Process, on the other hand, represents the steps taken along the way, the instruction itself and things that happened in relation to that instruction. Of course, students will have different outcomes, and they will have varying views of the instruction and teacher according to their experiences. Is someone a bad teacher if not every student in their class passes to the next level? Is someone a bad teacher if one student does not like the teacher? These questions lack consensus in the world of teaching and depend on context. However, if we want to break down what good teaching is, we should separate the process of teaching from the product of teaching. As professional educators, this can allow us to better reflect on ways to improve our teaching with each new term, group of students, and set of outcomes.