**Establishing Teacher Presence**

Establishing teacher presence, one that you want and that is appropriate to the cultural setting, is an important part of running a smooth and effective classroom. To get you thinking about this topic, read the following vignette from an experienced EFL teacher:

---

*Vignette: The Real Teacher*
I spent my third year teaching EFL abroad in a university-affiliated language program in Beijing that offered a variety of language classes to international students, mostly from Asian countries.

There was one other English teacher, a rather sober-looking woman who was much my senior. I dressed very casually for work, often sat on the table when teaching, and set a highly informal tone in class. Nevertheless, I was always prepared for teaching and created many communicative activities to supplement the book and get the students speaking. The students improved their speaking abilities, and I enjoyed the class tremendously.

One day near the end of the course, a female student casually said to me in the hallway, “I really like your class. You are not a real teacher like the other teacher, but it is fun.”

Over fourteen years have passed since that comment, and I still remember it, painfully so, whenever I start a new class. As a novice EFL teacher, I had not yet learned to recognize my audience, nor had I found my balance between projecting approachability and creating the image of a professional teacher.

---

As you can see from the story above, how you present yourself is an important facet of teaching. Spoken language, body language, eye contact, dress, voice, and overall manner make up who you are as a teacher and individual. It also greatly affects how you are perceived by your students – do you want to be the sage on the stage or the guide on the side? The latter is preferred in a student-centered environment, but in either case, your presence speaks volumes to your students, and you want to maintain an air of authority and professionalism.

Your manner of dress is also important, especially in overseas educational settings where American cultural beliefs of informal dress for work don’t apply. In fact, it is likely that your school will have a dress code. In any case, strive to present yourself as a professional. This generally means wearing standard business attire, though you may have to make adjustments to fit the local culture and climate. Keep in mind that in many cultures, body modification (e.g., tattoos and piercings) is frowned upon, so be prepared to make adjustments for that as well. Another important tip is to wear a comfortable pair of shoes – chances are you’ll be on your feet for long periods of time.

Be aware of your movements. Some teachers tend to remain in one place, while others walk around the class. The best way is to vary your movements. Circulate and assist as needed but be ready to step back at times as well. And when you do step into the high students in pair or group activities, it’s a good idea to crouch or even sit with them so that you approach them at their level.

Your voice is extremely important as well; it is your main instrument for communicating with students. Make sure you’re audible to your students. You may have large classes and those in the back need to hear you as well as those in front. Volume is essential, but overall quality is the goal. Speak loudly, but also clearly and slowly, especially when teaching beginning students. Practice giving instructions using plain and simple language. Use a variety of tones and volumes, depending on class activities. For example, you may want to speak in a more authoritative way when giving instructions, introducing new concepts and tasks, or giving a test.

A quieter voice, or total silence, is effective as well, especially for getting students’ attention; they will focus and try to hear what you are saying or wonder why you’re not speaking. This is also helpful because it allows you to save your “teacher’s voice” for dramatic effect.

Most importantly, conserve your voice. Take care of it and avoid straining your vocal cords. It’s easy to overdo it, and you may find yourself doing so at the onset of a new course or term. This is one reason (among others) for striving to limit teacher talk time (LTTT) and to put the burden of communication on your students.

Finally, as a teacher in a foreign country, you must consider your presence outside of the classroom as well. When you go out into the community before or after work, consider what might be appropriate attire and behaviors for your new surroundings. When in doubt, seek and ask a trusted figure who is familiar with your school culture and community. Your professional and personal lives merge when you are a teacher, just as they do in a number of high-profile jobs. Thus, your actions should reflect your position so that your students see you as a person worthy of respect, no matter where you go.