**Teaching Writing**

Along with speaking, writing is the other component of language production. And like oral production, the goal is the same: comprehensible and meaningful language production that meets the needs of your students. However, written language production is quite different from spoken language proficiency. Reid (1993) notes, “written language often exhibits…a relatively greater degree of formality…greater lexical (vocabulary) diversity….. longer sentence length…..and more subordination” (p. 67). Additionally, multilingual language writing presents its own unique set of challenges generally not encountered in first language teaching, such as the following:

Student Literacy Levels and Age: Your class may be comprised of students with limited or no literacy skills in their native language, so you may be teaching them writing skills for the first time in their lives.

Orthographic Challenges: Differences in writing systems may present difficulties when teaching. For some students (e.g., those whose L1 is a European language), this won’t be an issue. However, for others (e.g., native speakers of Arabic), you will probably need to spend extra time working on penmanship, spelling, and formatting.

Cultural Considerations: For students whose background includes a culture that emphasizes reading and literacy, writing in a second language may be fairly accessible to them. Those from a culture that emphasizes oral tradition over a written one may not see the importance or necessity of writing in a second language.

Other Issues: Even for students who are literate in their first language, well-educated, and enjoy writing, different distinctions may come into play that can hinder effective writing in a second language. These can include differences in organizational or rhetorical styles; incorporation of sources, references, and outside knowledge into writing; the role of the audience and assumptions about reader knowledge; and differences in linguistic and grammatical constructs that can interfere with comprehension (Hinkel, 2004).

While addressing these potential challenges in detail is beyond the scope of this text, you may encounter them in your teaching and thus should take them into consideration.